From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
I don't really pray much.
But
I pray at night that something happened
that I wake up in the morning and I
check the news and that the subsidy was
extended. Something that will make it
not $55,000 next year. Something.
This week, despite a last-ditch effort
by some House Republicans to strike a
deal on health care, Capitol Hill
remains deadlocked on whether to extend
support for millions of Americans who
get their health care through the
Affordable Care Act. Without subsidies,
it would be the minimum of $1,500 a
month. And there was no way. My original
estimate was about a 1,200% increase. I
think I was in
tears the entire rest of the week after
I got that news.
That's left those Americans to confront
a wrenching decision. I asked my
husband, like, what should we do? He's
like, maybe we go without health
insurance. And I was like, oh my god, no
way.
Keep paying for rising insurance costs
or risk going without it.
It's been a really tough couple of
months.
A lot of just like mentally preparing
for what this next year is going to look
like and it's pretty grim.
Today, my colleague Margot Sanger-Katz
explains who will be [music] most
affected and how this could all change
the political landscape heading [music]
into the midterms.
It's Thursday, December 18th.
Margot, welcome back to The Daily. Thank
you so much.
>> really feels like health care and
debates over health insurance have been
in the news like every other day almost.
And in large part, that's because there
have been these really huge and ongoing
and changing debates on Capitol Hill.
But it really feels like this week in
particular we have reached an inflection
point, which is why we wanted to have
you on the show. The last time we had
you on, it was in the thick of the
shutdown fight and we're bringing you
back here so that you can bring us up to
speed on where we are now.
So, as you may remember, the real crux
of the fight over the shutdown was
whether or not Congress was going to
extend these subsidies that help people
buy insurance in the Affordable Care Act
marketplaces. This was the thing that
Democrats decided to make the
centerpiece of their fight. And they
chose to fight over these subsidies
specifically because I think they felt
like this was a really strong issue for
them. Voters trust them more on health
care. It's like one of the Democrats'
strongest issues. But it has not been
the biggest issue that was in the
forefront of people's minds. It was a
little bit of a gamble. You know, were
they going to be able to get people to
pay attention to this? But they did.
And it didn't work from the perspective
of getting legislation passed. They shut
down the government for a record period
of time. Ultimately, they decided to
reopen the government without
legislation to extend these subsidies.
>> Right. Democrats basically lost that
fight. They agreed to reopen the
government with no deal on these health
care subsidies. The one deal they got is
that they were going to get to put up a
vote on the Senate floor. They did that.
Republicans didn't vote for it. It
didn't go anywhere. So, that was all
they got was a kind of failed vote on
this issue. And then since then, a lot
of Republican lawmakers, particularly
moderate Republicans in the House, have
been worried about what to do because
they know that the loss of these
subsidies is going to affect their
constituents and I think they're worried
about political consequences when the
midterms roll around. So, there's been
this kind of deal-making debate between
some of these moderate Republicans and
Democrats. Could they form a compromise?
Could they pass something that would
patch the subsidies and that other
Republicans could sign on to? But the
deadline for enrollment came on Monday
and they did not pass anything like
that.
>> So, this is the open enrollment that
we're all quite familiar with at this
point from the Affordable Care Act.
>> Yeah, I mean, you probably have the same
thing for like we have same thing here
at The Times for our work uh insurance.
There's some period of time in which you
have to pick and pay for your health
insurance and that signs you up for the
whole year. And there just are deadlines
that happen every year. So, even though
we're not at the end of the year now,
we're kind of a little bit at the end of
the line for these subsidies. People had
to make their choices. Right. Now, that
said, it may not be totally over. This
week something kind of unusual happened.
A couple of moderate Republicans who are
really mad at the Speaker of the House
for not giving them a chance to vote on
this, joined up with all of the
Democrats to sign what's called a
discharge petition, which is a way to
get a bill on the floor without the
House Speaker's cooperation. And that
bill would extend the subsidies for 3
years.
>> Mhm. But that bill isn't going to come
up for a vote for probably a couple of
weeks and it's not clear whether it can
pass the Senate. So, for now, it looks
like these subsidies are going to expire
and a lot of people are going to have to
pay more for their health insurance. So,
the key word that we have been using a
lot here is subsidies. But I want to
make sure that people actually
understand what that means.
Specifically, what were the subsidies
and how are they changing? So, if you
will indulge me, I think it makes sense
to go back in time a little bit and talk
about Obamacare.
>> Definitely. So, when Democrats passed
the Affordable Care Act in 2010, they
set up a system where people who don't
get their insurance through work or
through a government program have access
to a market. And if they make less than
400% of the federal poverty level.
That's like $63,000
>> Right. That sounds like a lot
>> this year. It might sound like a lot
400%, but that is For a single person,
it's like $63,000. For a larger family,
you might be talking about $100,000. If
you make less than that, you get some
help buying your insurance. And it's on
a sort of sliding scale. So, the poorer
you are, the more help you get. And the
idea was to make insurance affordable
for people who didn't have it. But over
time, what a lot of the authors of the
Affordable Care Act realized is that the
health insurance was still kind of
expensive for these people who were
uninsured. So, going into the pandemic,
there were around 12 million people who
were signed up for Obamacare plans. That
was less than everyone had expected when
the bill passed. And so, when the
pandemic happened and there was this
real openness to spending more money by
the federal government, Democrats
revisited those original subsidies and
they topped them off with new subsidies
that made the payments even more
generous and asked people to pay even
less of the total bill for their health
coverage.
So, what did those more generous
subsidies look like? So, under the
system that Democrats passed during the
pandemic, basically everyone who buys
insurance in this market got more
financial help.
>> Mhm. But there are two groups that I
think benefited particularly.
One group was the poorest Americans in
this market. The way the Affordable Care
Act calculates that is anyone who earns
less than one and a half times the
federal poverty level in a given year.
That's a little less than $25,000 this
year.
The Democrats reset the subsidies so
that those people have to pay nothing.
>> Nothing. Zero. They can get an insurance
plan basically for free.
>> Mhm.
And then there's a new group who
actually didn't get [music] any
subsidies under the original Obamacare
design who were now under this enhanced
subsidy structure getting help for the
first time. So, these are people who
earn more than 400% of the federal
poverty level. And you know, this is a
group that includes a lot of
entrepreneurs, people who work for small
businesses that can't offer insurance,
farmers and ranchers, and also early
retirees who either chose to stop
working early before they qualified for
Medicare, or maybe lost their job and
were [music] having trouble getting back
into the job market and are living off
their savings.
So, basically, it sounds like the
Democrats decided that not only did the
subsidies need to get more generous, but
they also needed to be available to a
[music] lot more people. Well, I think
this was a group that a lot of Democrats
felt were really slipping between the
cracks. And so, I think Democrats were
kind of happy to come back and try to
fix this program. And it actually made a
very big financial difference for some
of these people.
So, that's the plan that Democrats
implemented in 2021. And at first, they
made it really short-term. But then they
immediately saw that tons more people
were signing up for coverage. Do we know
who was really driving that surge? What
kind of people? What kind of income
level?
Almost all of this growth is coming from
that bottom income category. So, those
are the people that are eligible for
these zero-dollar premiums. I think
there are a couple of reasons why that
happened. One is just that's a group
that's much more likely to be uninsured.
If you think about the kinds of jobs
that low-income people have, they're
just much less likely to come with
health insurance. You know, if there's
someone who has a bunch of gig economy
jobs that they're patching together, or
a part-time job, those are the kinds of
jobs generally don't have health
insurance. And so, those people are
really benefiting from the ability to go
get a free plan somewhere else.
It's also like free is a really
important horizon, it turns out. Even
asking people to pay a small amount can
really discourage them and particularly
low-income people from enrolling in
these kind of programs. A lot of really
low-income people don't even have a bank
account.
>> Mhm. And so, if you just imagine the
mechanics of like, how is that person
going to pay a monthly premium? They
can't write a check, they don't have a
credit card. Not impossible, but makes
it harder.
What did Republicans think of all these
changes to the Obamacare subsidies?
Well, I think it's important to remember
Republicans never liked Obamacare. They
felt like it was a waste of money, they
thought it was uh putting too many rules
on the health insurance system. And this
was a huge expansion. It's a lot more
dollars, was bringing more people into
the system. And I think they also
objected to some of the specific policy
changes. They really didn't like the
idea that all these people were going to
get insurance for free. It felt sort of
unfair to them. Everyone else has to pay
something for health insurance. And I
think a lot of Republican lawmakers feel
like even these very low-income people,
if they really value their insurance,
they should have to pay some minimal
amount just to prove that it's something
that they really want and need.
>> Mhm. But of course, that didn't matter
at the time because the Democrats
controlled the entire government. They
had the Senate, the House, and the White
House. So, when 2022 rolled around, the
Democrats decided to extend these more
generous subsidies for even longer. They
just weren't able to make them permanent
because, as you may remember, Joe
Manchin, the conservative Democratic
senator from West Virginia, insisted
that they not make this a permanent
policy. Democrats chose to have the
policy expire in 2025 because they were
hoping that they would have enough
control in the government that they
would be able to eke out a
bipartisan compromise to extend the
subsidies further. But, of course,
that's not what happened. Republicans
swept to power in 2024, and that's why
we're now in the situation where the
only way that they were able to advocate
for this policy was by shutting down the
government.
Okay, and so that brings us to this
moment where the subsidies are expiring,
no agreement has been reached. What do
we know about the people who'll be most
impacted by the fact that these are
going away?
Basically, everyone in this market is
going to be affected to some degree. I
said there were around 12 million people
in the market before the extra
subsidies. Now, there about 24 million
people in the market. So, this
low-income group we were just talking
about, that's the biggest group. It's
like half the market, and those people
are going to have to go from paying
nothing for their insurance to paying
somewhere around $50 a month for their
insurance. Then there's this kind of
middle-income group, and those people
are also going to have to pay more for
their insurance, probably somewhere in
the neighborhood of like $150 more per
month on average. And then you get to
this group earning more than $65,000,
and that is a small share of the market,
but in dollar terms, those are the
people that are facing the biggest
effects. Some of those people are
looking at price increases in the
neighborhood of one or even $2,000 more
per month without these enhanced
subsidies. Right, because for that
group, those highest earners, their
subsidies are going away entirely, and
so they'll see the biggest potential
increase.
Yeah, that's right. They are looking at
just absolutely huge and astronomical
price increases that may be impossible
for some of them to pay.
So, over the last few weeks, as [music]
people in all of these income categories
have been looking at their options and
thinking about the ongoing drama in
Washington, I think that a lot of them
have started [music] to consider some
really difficult choices.
Should they buy a less generous plan
with a really high deductible [music] so
they don't have to pay as much? Should
they try to rearrange their work so
maybe they earn less and they get right
under that threshold where they could
qualify for a subsidy? [music]
Do they need to earn more money, get a
second job, or cut back on [music] some
of their living expenses in order to be
able to pay the premium? And all of that
has really [music] come to a head this
week. When the deadline hit, the
subsidies were not extended, and people
had to ultimately [music] decide what
kind of insurance they were going to
choose, if any insurance at all.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Hello.
Good morning, this is Lizzy. Hey, this
is Anna from the Times. How you doing?
All right, what can I help you with?
Daily producer Anna Foley has been
talking to people who get their
insurance through the Affordable Care
Act marketplace to hear more about how
they're navigating the reduction in
subsidies.
Why don't you just go ahead and start by
telling me a little bit about yourself?
I live in Mountain City, Tennessee. I
was a
delivery driver for Amazon.
I work for a small family business. I
run my daughter's tattoo shop. So, I am
a small business owner. Do you like
being your own boss? You know, it suits
my personality type. I don't like people
telling me what to do.
But, honestly, the the stressors of
things like this, of health care, it's
gotten really hairy. It's gotten really,
really difficult.
There were truly no good options. Every
single plan forced me to compromise on
cost, on providers, and on
prescriptions. Every single one of them.
I have a
>> [music]
>> rare chronic illness called um
eosinophilic asthma,
and I need to receive a specialty
biologic injection every month
in order to be able to breathe.
And the co-pays on that drug alone
are $350
a month,
which takes my overall
health care costs to about $700
a month.
It's
a shame that it's a luxury
to have air in my lungs.
What are you going to have to change in
your life to now cover this health care
cost? I'm having to make a wholesale
decisions about my career based on my
health insurance.
>> [music]
>> Like after all these years and all this
expertise I've built, do I go and down
to Starbucks and just [music] work at
Starbucks for benefits and make nothing,
but at least I have catastrophic [music]
coverage for my family?
I already
>> [music]
>> live a very frugal lifestyle.
So, [music]
it's just going to be that on steroids,
you know.
Um more couponing,
walking to work instead of driving my
car. Um Oh, wow. How far is that walk? 3
miles. Oh.
That's not nothing. It isn't nothing,
no.
And [music]
Christmas this year has already been
difficult.
Um
I wanted to get my mom hearing aids for
Christmas,
but now I've settled on a couple Yankee
candles
instead.
I also got married this year,
>> [music]
>> but that changes things monetarily,
right? Because if your family
household size is one,
>> [music]
>> you are able to make significantly
more
as one person
>> [music]
>> than you are as two people.
You know, like so when you get married,
you can only make up to [music] $84,600
to stay under that 400% poverty level.
So, it's like do we just get divorced?
You know what I mean? Like it's
something we're [music] considering is
getting divorced. Really?
Yes. We're kind of stuck with no option
basically without these subsidies. So,
[music]
you know, thankfully we stay as healthy
as we possibly can, but you know, we're
just going to have to hope for the best
and just pay out of pocket as needed.
So, as of right now, you don't have
health
>> [music]
>> insurance for 2026.
Correct. Yeah, we only have it through
December 31st of this year. I've got a
houseful of several family members who
say they're hoping they'll get the
Congress will get their act together and
get something passed to help out,
otherwise they're going to have to drop
their insurance. So.
There are a few things out in the world
that I cannot control myself. I'm a
total control freak. I need the
government to help [music] in very few
situations. The rest, I promise I will
take care of. This is a blinding bright
light where
people need [music] help.
I just feel like I've done everything
right my whole life and
and I just feel like I've just been sold
a bag of And now,
now what am I going to do? It's like,
okay,
I got it. [music]
Really, really rethink my future.
And so it gives me a sense of
loss and bewilderment and
>> [music]
>> regret.
Margo, our colleague Anna Foley, who's a
producer here on the daily, has been
spending a lot of time talking to people
who are in the middle of making these
really difficult health care choices
right now.
And I wonder if you might be able to
project forward for us a little bit.
Like what might this start to look like
heading into next year and beyond for
these people?
We don't really know for sure. The
Congressional Budget Office, so they're
the nerds that help Congress figure out
what their laws are going to do. They
think that about 2 million more people
will become uninsured in 2026 as a
result of this policy and almost 4
million people over the course of the
next decade, but there are other serious
analysts who have estimated a much
larger impact. Enrolling in the
marketplaces has doubled since they put
this policy in place in 2021. So, if you
think about all of the people who newly
became insured in this market, that's 12
million people. And we're kind of
snapping back to the policy from before.
And on the one hand, that is really
disruptive for the folks who can no
longer afford their health care or have
to dramatically rethink the health care
they can afford.
But in some ways, it also represents a
reversion back to kind of a status quo.
And so I'm wondering how you are
thinking about the world that we are
about to enter.
Yeah, I think Democrats actually have
been somewhat misleading in the way that
they've been talking about it. They keep
acting like the subsidies are going to
go away, and I think that has caused
some alarm among some people that all of
the subsidies are going away, that
people are going to all have to pay the
full cost of their health insurance. And
that's not true. What we're reverting
back to is the original structure of
Obamacare that Democrats thought really
carefully about and wrote and passed in
2010. So, we do know that way more
people bought insurance with this extra
financial help. It definitely does make
a difference in people's lives and it
does make a big difference in people's
coverage. But, there is a real debate
about what level of subsidization is
appropriate in these markets and whether
and how much people should be asked to
pay for their health insurance. Because
in part, over the same period of time in
which we've been paying all this extra
money to help people buy insurance, the
cost of insurance itself has gotten a
lot more expensive.
And why is it that health insurance has
gotten so expensive over the last few
years?
So, people love to rag on health
insurance companies and no one really
likes them. They don't like how
expensive they are. There are lots of
other things they don't like about them.
But, the reason why health insurance is
so expensive is because health care in
the United States is really expensive
and the costs are growing over time. And
there are a bunch of reasons for that.
Recently, of course, we've had these
GLP-1 anti-obesity medications, super
transformative drugs. They really could
help a lot of people improve their
health, but they're costly and lots of
people want to take them. And that's an
example of a much broader trend in the
US health care system, which is that we
love to use new technology when there
are new drugs or treatments on the
cutting edge that really seem to make a
difference in public health, we want to
use them even though they're going to
cost a lot of money.
I know you mentioned earlier that in the
weeks since the shutdown, Republicans
have been trying to get some kind of
health care bill together and now we
have this discharge petition. But, I do
wonder as of Wednesday afternoon, what
appears to you like the most likely
resolution to all of this?
I think it's just really hard to say. We
are right in the middle of this debate.
I think what you can see with this
discharge petition is that there are
some Republicans who are really worried
about this issue politically. But, you
can also see that there are other
Republicans who really just don't like
Obamacare and don't want to be pouring
more money into it and they're kind of
having this fight within their own
party. They control the government and
the Democrats cannot get this policy
done by themselves. And so, I think
we're just going to have to watch over
the next few weeks to see if there's
some kind of compromise.
>> Mhm. But, even if one of these bills
comes together in the next few weeks or
months, it's still going to be kind of
complicated because a lot of people have
already picked their plans for the year
and they wouldn't have chosen their
insurance knowing that these subsidies
are coming back. But, I think the most
likely scenario is we're kind of just
snapping back to this pre-pandemic
policy where people do have help buying
their insurance, but not nearly as much
as they've had in these last few years.
I wonder how we should think about the
political pressure that you mentioned
because
not only are we heading into a midterm
election year, but it was only last year
that the head of United Healthcare was
shot and killed in the streets and
people were quite frankly cheering. They
were saying that this is what happens
when United and all these other
insurance companies charge too much.
They're taking advantage of people.
So, in terms of the political
implications of potentially knocking
millions of people off of their health
insurance, how does that change the
political landscape? A lot of these
people who have benefited from these
enhanced subsidies actually don't live
in the places that Democrats govern.
They live in states that are controlled
by Republicans and that voted for Trump
in the last election. So, the biggest
increases of enrollment in Obamacare
have been in southern states, Texas,
Florida, Tennessee, Georgia. These are
real Republican states and those voters
may have something to say if they blame
their Republican lawmaker for losing
this really important financial
assistance that they were getting and
they might vote them out of office. But,
I do think it's important to note this
is a relatively small share of the
public. We are only talking about 24
million people who are in this market.
And in overall polling, very few
Americans are currently ranking health
care as one of their number one issues
going into the next election.
>> [music]
>> So,
I think the question is, does the
subsidy issue start to function more
like a metaphor where it's reminding
Americans of their frustrations with the
high cost of the health care system
outside of this small market because
health care is getting more expensive
for everyone. Right. And of course,
there's a much larger conversation
happening in this country right now
about affordability [music] writ large,
right? Like even beyond health care,
that is on people's minds. It's
certainly on voters' minds. Sure. And I
think there's a real question about how
this issue evolves over the course of
the midterm election as Americans hear
more and more stories like this from
their neighbors and their family members
and their friends.
>> [music]
>> Margot Sanger-Katz, thank you so much
for joining us.
Thanks for having me on.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
Dan Bongino, the number two official at
the FBI, [music]
said on Wednesday that he would step
down next month,
bringing an end to his brief but
tumultuous stint [music] at the bureau,
where he was known for his volcanic
temper, missteps, and hyperactive
presence on social media.
>> [music]
>> The upheaval comes at a precarious
moment for the bureau and for the White
House. President Trump and his
appointees to the FBI, which long
operated independently of [music] White
House interference, is a critical part
of his retribution agenda.
And
Warner Bros. Discovery went on the
attack on Wednesday [music] against the
attempted hostile takeover of the
company by Paramount.
Warner Bros. Discovery [music]
urged its shareholders to reject
Paramount's offer and said that
Paramount's owners, the billionaire
[music] father-son duo Larry and David
Ellison, have, quote, consistently
misled them.
The Ellisons are determined to
outmaneuver Netflix,
>> [music]
>> which reached a deal to buy a large
portion of Warner Bros. business earlier
this month.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley, Olivia Nat, Stella Tan, and Diana
Wynn,
with reporting [music] from Anna Foley.
It was edited by Rob Zipko,
contains music [music] by Dan Wong,
Alicia Beattie, Marion Zano, and Pat
McCusker,
and was engineered [music] by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]